[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>GREGG BRADEN: This
is the way we think.
Like, we complete each
other's sentences.
Hello, my name's
Gregg Braden, and I
want to welcome you to this
very special edition of Missing
Links.
Today, I am very blessed to
have with me a dear friend,
a colleague I've known for more
years than either one of us
can count.
I've had the privilege
of touring the world
and speaking with this man on
every continent of the Earth
about the new science
that is overturning
150 years of scientific thinking
when it comes to you and me
and the way we think
about our bodies,
our relationship to the world,
to the past, to the future,
to one another.
We were recently
invited as a team
to speak at the United Nations
in New York as the 2030
developmental goals-- the new
Sustainable Development Goals--
were being developed.
And I want to share
with you a little bit
about what happened
during that meeting
and what it meant to us, what
we had the opportunity to share
with the United Nations.
So Bruce Lipton, thank
you so much for being
with us on "Missing Links" and
welcome to the show tonight.
>>BRUCE LIPTON: Well,
thank you, Gregg.
I certainly appreciate
being here with you
and this wonderful audience.
Thank you very much.
>>BRADEN: Oh you're
very, very welcome.
I know we're both busy.
We're speaking at a conference
here in northern New Mexico
with people from 19 nations
are with us this weekend.
>>LIPTON: Our own
United Nations.
>>BRADEN: Our own-- they are
our little United Nations,
and we've had the
opportunity break away
and have this conversation.
And I think this is an
important conversation.
It's a little bit
behind the scenes
of what really
happened for you and I.
We were blessed to be
invited to speak to some very
specific groups as the
Sustainable Development
Goals were being developed.
And you know, you and I
never really talked afterward
about what that was all about
for you, how you felt about it,
why you think it was important.
And I thought it might be
interesting to do that now.
So I'd like to just ask you--
when we had the opportunity
to speak at the UN,
how did you feel
about sharing the
new discoveries?
And did you feel that it was a
receptive audience that we had?
>>LIPTON: Well, first of
all, I enjoyed very much
the opportunity to give
them some new information,
because they're really
operating from outdated science.
And how can you plan the
future if your whole background
is really not living up to
the current understanding
of the world.
So this gave us an
opportunity to give them
some new information.
I felt they were
really very receptive.
Also very confused
about, well, this
is very different than their
normal operating procedure.
But for us, it was
really important
because the new science
reveals that we're
moving through an evolutionary
paradigm at this time,
and it's necessary
for an organization,
such as the United Nations,
to be fully informed
of this because how can
we successfully move
into the future on
problems that we've
been carrying from the past?
>>BRADEN: You know, I
was really encouraged,
first by the invitation--
and I'll just be very honest
with our listeners here.
The United Nations-- when
we talk about the UN,
it is not like there
is one specific UN.
There are UNs within UNs.
It's like a big company,
in some respects.
And there are some
really excited,
forward-thinking,
young people who
are very interested in
embracing the new ideas
and applying them to what we
see happening in the world
and where it's moving.
And there were some
other people there
that, I'm just going to use
the word a little reluctant
because the new discoveries that
you and I are talking about--
Bruce, they present such a
different way of thinking.
It's so different.
In a single lifetime,
the revolution
in the way we're being
invited to think--
we've asked science
to tell us who we are.
And for 150 years, since
the time of Charles Darwin,
science has been
revealing the deepest
truths of our existence.
And the question is,
now, are scientists
willing to embrace the truth
the science is revealing
and apply those
truths in the world
as we are moving forward with
organizations like the UN.
>>LIPTON: Well, it's
very difficult for them.
Because if you've had your
whole career and this is the way
you understood life and
you did research this way
and you did work this way and
then someone walks in the door
and goes, well, you know that's
not exactly the way it is.
It pulls the rug out from them.
They feel very insecure.
I mean, it was exactly like
this when quantum physics
was introduced to the world
because the only physicists
were Newtonian physicists.
Then imagine you had your whole
career, university professor,
research guy, and you walk in
one day and somebody says--
especially young guys,
because that's who they were--
says, well, your idea about the
universe is really incorrect.
And it's like, what?
So basically, there's
a lot of resistance
because if this is what
you've done your whole life,
it's not easy for some
people say, oh, OK,
let's drop what I've done.
And let's go on
a whole new tact.
>>BRADEN: Yeah, there
was some resistance.
You know what I found
really encouraging?
Well, I felt like it
was a little microcosm
of the world speaking
to the people
because there are so many
different and very unique
views.
And I think you know about what
I'm going to share with you.
While we were speaking-- we'd
already started the meetings--
the door opened in
the back of the room
and a few people filed in and
stood along the back wall.
They never sat down,
and then they left.
And you and I looked at
each other, and we thought,
what was that?
We didn't know until
after the meeting
that the Secretary
General of the UN
had sent a team to check us out.
They wanted to see
what we were saying
and where the relevance
may have fallen.
And we also found-- what
we heard afterward--
was that they turned on the
CCTV-- the closed circuit TVs--
in the UN complex
for people that
wanted to hear our
presentation who
were not in the room with us.
And I found that
really encouraging.
I was excited.
And I was encouraged to
know that that had happened.
And I think that's an
indication that there
is an openness for new
ideas that in my lifetime--
I went to school in
1950s, 60s, early 70s,
and I remember there was a time
when the science was taught,
it was so buttoned up.
It was so perfect.
It's like, this is the way it
is, and there was no question.
And now the new
discoveries are actually
opening the door
to deeper questions
than answering definitively many
of the questions of the past.
And that tells us that
we're on the precipice,
we're on the verge of a
very, very different way
of thinking-- a new paradigm--
and we're being forced
to do it because where
we are in the world right now.
The world is pushing us to the
very edge of who we believe
we are, and the old solutions,
based on the old ideas,
aren't working and
that's creating
the opening for the new ideas.
>>LIPTON: Let's face
a simple fact here
that right now, civilization
is facing the sixth mass
extinction of life
on this planet.
Five times in history,
life was thriving
and some event essentially
wiped out 79% of life.
Today, we're in those
numbers right now.
And what's more important
about it is science
has recognized that
it's human behavior that
is responsible for the
extinction that will actually
do us in.
And the significance
about that is very simple.
It says, if we want to survive,
then you cannot keep doing what
we've been doing.
So the old stories are
actually the problem,
and Einstein's quote, you
can't solve the problems
with the same thinking
that created the problems.
And fortunately,
you and I have been
at the leading edge
of a new science
and a new understanding
of the world.
And it's been really
great to lecture with you
and to go out, because
instead of lecturing
to our former colleagues,
it's really taking the message
and talking to the
public, because the public
is the one that really
needs this information.
Knowledge is power.
Lack of knowledge
is a lack of power.
And the knowledge that
they've been operating
from on the basic science,
that we always thought,
that was truth, turns out
to be flawed, so much flawed
that that's why we're
creating our own extinction,
because our belief
systems are flawed.
And now we have the
opportunity to go out and talk
to the public and offer them a
more empowering understanding
of life than the
conventional belief
that we're just victims
of circumstances.
>>BRADEN: So you and
I are both scientists,
and I think this is why
we received the invitation
in the way that we did.
You're a life
scientist, biologist.
I'm an earth scientist,
a geologist by degree.
And from our unique
perspectives,
although they're very
different sciences,
it's hard to draw a line
from one to the other
because they're so interrelated.
Both of them are involved
with cycles, cycles of time,
cycles of experience.
And you're talking to me about
this cycle, the extinction
cycle, that you're
talking about right now.
>>LIPTON: And it's
really important
that you brought up the
fact that, while the earth
science and life sciences
are coming together here,
the idea of a separation,
which was in some sense
based on the Newtonian physics
that there is a material
existence and an
energy existence,
and they don't
relate to each other.
Well, that's gone by the wayside
because quantum mechanics
revealed there's only one thing.
It's energy, and everything
is interconnected.
And when it comes
to Earth and humans,
this is really
profoundly important
because our evolution did
not happen by accident.
Our evolution was adaptation.
So as earth changes
were occurring,
biological organisms were
responding to the Earth
by adjusting the genetics of
the organism to sustain life.
So you can never separate
earth science from biology,
because that's one of the
primary sources of information
that controls our own biology.
>>BRADEN: What you're
saying about the past
is true in the present moment.
It's happening to us right now.
We are living this
rare convergence--
and I've talked about
it in this series--
this convergence
of natural rhythms
and natural cycles, any one
of which in and of themselves
would be enough to change
the way we think and live.
But the fact that at least
three of these cycles
are converging-- the climate
cycle, economic cycles,
and cycles of human
conflict, they're
all converging right now.
They're creating the
conditions that you're
talking about that drive
evolution, so the changes that
are being forced
upon us in the world.
Our world is changing.
We can't stop that.
We've got to either think and
live differently or resist
that change, and that's where
the struggle comes from.
>>LIPTON: Well, I
think resisting is
futile in this particular case.
The Earth is a lot bigger
than we are on this.
And while we have certainly
put our hand in the system
and messed it up
a bit, the Earth
is trying to get
us to come back.
It's giving us these
lessons that say,
if you don't learn
to live in harmony,
then you won't be here
either, because extinction
is going to affect all of us.
And we're not talking
1,000 years from now.
We're talking within a century.
And so it really is important
for people to wake up and say,
what have we done, and
why have we done it,
and is there a
better way to do it?
And this is why I enjoy
our collaboration,
because we offer answers to
those very vital questions.
>>BRADEN: When
you're presenting,
and you have such an
awesome way of being
very present with the audience.
Whether there are 5,000
people in the room
or there's 200
people in the room,
everybody feels like you
were there just for them.
>>LIPTON: Well, I am, Gregg.
You know why?
Because I was a teacher,
a professor in a medical
school teaching the old science
and living the old science.
And my lessons came not
from textbooks or anything.
They came directly from cells.
I was cloning stem
cells 52 years ago now.
But the relevance about that
is by studying the cells,
I really learned
another way of life.
They taught me.
And the relevance about
that is when I applied it,
my life completely changed.
So I let go of the concept that
we're victims of our genetics,
let's say, or victims of
world changes and all that.
We are actually creators.
And this is really the principle
that quantum physics leaves us
with.
It recognizes that
mind is really
the source of all
of this creation,
and if we don't like
the creation, then
rather than going out and
changing the creation,
we really have to go back
inside and change the mind.
And this is, well,
all empowering,
because it means that an
individual doesn't have
to go out and fight the world.
They just have to learn how
to change their consciousness
to accommodate a
better, healthier life.
>>BRADEN: So you're
touching on some things.
When I'm sitting in that
audience listening you,
you do such a beautiful
job of illustrating
some of the concepts.
You're covering a lot of ground.
We both are right now.
But I want to ask you
a couple of specifics
just so our viewers have a
sense of precisely what you're
talking about.
So I'm going to take
about a half a step back.
>>LIPTON: OK.
>>BRADEN: When you
talked about the impact
that humans are having
upon the earth right now,
you give a statistic
for the amount of life
that has disappeared
in our lifetimes,
and it is a mind
blowing statistic.
I watch people in the audience
when they hear this number.
Nobody's talking about this.
They can't believe it.
And I wonder if you'd
like to share that.
>>LIPTON: Well, I would,
because I think we all
have to wake up to this fact.
In 1970, the World
Wildlife Foundation
took a survey of how many
animals are on planet Earth.
They just completed a second
one of those two years ago,
and at that point, 62% of the
total animal population in 1970
had disappeared.
So there's about one third
of the animals left just
since 1970.
And the reality about
that is that not
only are the animals on
the earth being infected,
science has also recognized
that there will be
no fish in the ocean in 2048.
Now, that's not a
million years from now.
My own kids will be
living on a planet
where there's no fish because
overfishing, destroying
breeding grounds, and
especially polluting the water
is killing the ocean.
When the ocean's dead, for
sure we're on the slab next.
>>BRADEN: No, that's where
the food chain begins.
So I just want to
clarify, when you
say one third of the life,
that includes the ocean
life as well?
One third of--
>>LIPTON: We've
lost more than that.
We've lost 90% of the
ocean life since 1950.
>>BRADEN: In our lifetimes?
>>LIPTON: In our lifetime.
>>BRADEN: That
just blows me away.
I mean, that's a mind
boggling statistic.
That's unsustainable.
>>LIPTON: When you were
young, you maybe even on TV,
they'd always have big
fishing expeditions.
They go out there,
and they catch
these big hammerhead sharks
and these big swordfish ones
and all these strange things.
It's like you can't
catch them now.
We can't even find them.
>>BRADEN: Yeah, it
is hard to find them.
So the next thing that
I wanted to clarify
was when you were talking about
the work that you were doing.
And I really want our
viewers to understand this.
Bruce Lipton was in the
laboratory performing
experiments over 50 years ago
that were discounted in his day
and now are the foundation
for the new science
that we call epigenetics.
Epigenetics, where the
environment of a cell
determines how that
cell expresses itself.
And you were--
I've seen the publications,
peer-reviewed scientific
journals.
So can you talk
to me a little bit
about what you learned
from the cells.
You alluded to this.
What did the cells teach
you in the Petri dish,
and how do we apply that to what
we're doing in our world today?
>>LIPTON: Well, the first
thing, let's start off
with what I was teaching
students in school
at that time.
And I was teaching
them a concept called
genetic determinism,
which is a concept that
says your genes can
determine the character
and quality of your life.
So everybody's bought into
that, and matter of fact,
they're still
teaching the same idea
in elementary levels
and high school levels.
But when you go up in college,
that sort of disappears,
because at a higher
understanding,
genetic determinism
is not valid.
Genes do not control us.
The whole belief that
genes turn on and off
is a false understanding.
Genes are blueprints
just like a blueprint
in an architect's office.
You go in an architects
office and ask her,
is your blueprint
on or off, and she'd
look at you like you're crazy.
Well, people talk about the
genes turning on and off,
and I go, that's
completely false.
So this is really hard,
because almost everyone, when
you go out in the
street, goes, oh yeah,
a gene turned on
and gave me cancer.
A gene did this.
And I say, well, what's the
consequence of that thought?
And very simply, it's this.
As far as we know, we didn't
pick the genes we came with.
If we don't like the
characteristics we have,
you can't change
the genes anyway.
And the belief that
genes turn on and off
takes you out of the
equation, and that leaves us
as victims, victims
of our heredity.
Oh my god, there's cancer
running in my family,
or something like that.
And we believe the genes
are going to do this.
So that's what I'm teaching.
But in the laboratory,
I was cloning
stem cells, which are the
equivalent of embryonic cells.
>>BRADEN: This is in the 1960s?
>>LIPTON: '67.
>>BRADEN: You were
cloning stem cells in '67?
>>LIPTON: Yeah.
I think they were
probably not more than 20
or 30 people in
the world that knew
what a stem cell was in 1967.
I just happened to be in the
right place at the right time.
A stem cell is an
embryonic cell.
And I put one stem
cell in a dish,
and then it divides
every 10 hours.
So first there's one, then
two, four, eight, doubling,
doubling.
At the end of week, 30,000
cells in the Petri dish,
but the most important fact is
they all came from one parent.
So that meant I had 30,000
genetically identical cells.
>>BRADEN: OK.
>>LIPTON: And we grow cells
in a laboratory in something
called culture medium,
and culture medium is
a laboratory version of blood.
So if I grow human cells, I say,
what is human blood made out
of?
And then I take those
ingredients, synthesize them
in a lab, and feed
cells culture medium.
But since I create
the culture medium,
I can change some of the
composition a little tiny bit.
So I created three
slightly different versions
of culture medium.
Slightly different
chemistry, OK?
But the culture medium is the
environment for the cells.
I fed these dishes, and they all
had genetically identical cells
in them because I split up
the 30,000 into three dishes.
But each one had a slightly
different environment
because I had slightly
different culture medium.
In one dish, the
cells formed muscle.
The other dish, they formed
bone, and in a third dish,
the cells formed fat cells.
Well, the profound
important question
is, well, what controls
the fate of the cells?
And we've always said genes
control the fate of cells.
And I go, yeah, but
all of these cells
were genetically identical.
So all of a sudden, it's
like, well, they didn't
have different genes in them.
They had different environments.
>>BRADEN: Right.
>>LIPTON: And the environment
was interacting with the cell
and selecting gene
activity in the cell.
And all of a sudden, this
says, my goodness, then
the belief that the
genes inside of us
are controlling us
from inside-- it
says no, it's our environment
and our perceptions,
because the blood in our body
is the original culture medium.
And our body, when
we look in the mirror
and see one living entity,
I go, that's an illusion,
because a body's made
out of 50 trillion cells.
So a body, by definition,
is a community of cells,
because they're
the living element.
The body is represented
by the community.
>>BRADEN: We're the Petri dish?
>>LIPTON: We are a skin
covered Petri dish,
and we have original
culture medium called blood.
I say, it doesn't
make a difference
if the cell is in a plastic
dish or in a skin covered dish.
The fate of the cell is not
controlled by its genes,
it's controlled by the
information in the environment.
Well, in my skin covered
Petri dish, of course,
the original culture
medium is blood.
And then the
question comes, well,
if the chemistry of the
blood is controlling
the fate of the
cells, what controls
the chemistry of the blood?
Well, you take it up one notch.
The brain is the chemist.
And then I go, OK, so
what chemicals should
the brain put into the blood?
And all of a sudden,
we go up one more notch
and recognize whatever
picture we have in our mind,
it is translated by the brain
into complementary chemistry.
>>BRADEN: OK, so
this is important.
And I'm going to
bring us back to--
>>LIPTON: I think
it's important, yeah.
>>BRADEN: --where it began.
We are living a convergence
of these cycles.
The world is changing.
And your experiments
in the laboratory
were showing you that the
environment is what determines
how we respond to the change.
What we now know is that our
perceptions of the change
are what's driving
the shift that we
see at the genetic level,
at the level of the genes.
>>LIPTON: Exactly.
>>BRADEN: So here
we are at the UN.
We're sharing these
new discoveries.
We're talking about
converging cycles.
And they're asking for
input because they're
developing the
sustainable development
goals through the year 2030.
So what can we learn?
What is the lesson that we
can learn from the cells?
At the deepest
level of life, what
is the wisdom that they
preserve and show us every day,
if we have the wisdom
to recognize it,
that we can apply to
this time in our lives
and the convergence
of these cycles
so we can thrive
in a healthy way
and move through these changes?
>>LIPTON: Well, the most
important understanding
is that over evolution, it's
all been driven by what's
going on in the environment.
And we came from a very
healthy environment.
So the whole web of life
grew up in something we
called the Garden, so to speak.
And the reality is we've
lost our understanding of why
we were here.
We have this belief
that we got here
by accidents of genetic
mutation, the Darwinian theory.
Oh, a gene changed,
and they went off
in a different direction.
The belief that these
gene changes occur
is really emphasized as
being a random mutation.
That's an accidental mutation.
So I said, well, what's
the function of a human?
They said, well, we
got here through,
what, a whole
series of accidents,
accidental mutations.
So I say, then
what is the purpose
of us being on the planet?
And if you look at it
from that point of view,
it says, we have
no purpose, it's
only an accident that we're
here in the first place.
But if you go back
and understand
that every organism is adjusting
itself to the environment
and trying to keep balance
with all the other organisms,
every time nature
add in an organism,
she added it because the
previous system was getting out
of balance.
And you bring a new one in, and
it returns it back to balance.
But inevitably, that will throw
it out of balance as well.
Then another new one comes in.
And we are near the
top of this addition.
We are so powerful an
influence in the environment
that without knowledge that was
our job, look what we've done.
We're destroying
the environment.
So the wake up call is this.
We cannot live without nature
because we came from nature.
If we destroy nature
as we're doing,
then we're actually
cutting our own lifeline
to the planet at this point.
So the issue is,
what can we learn?
The answer is, we must learn to
return the environment as best
we can, or at least learn
how to live in harmony
with this environment.
And I understand very
importantly, as you talk about,
the idea that climate
change is occurring.
Yes, that's a natural
process in itself.
Of course, we're exacerbating
it because our own activities
are making it worse.
But the most important thing
that you say, and it really
should come out again, is this.
The idea that we'll sit around
one day and the environment
will return, and
everybody will be happy,
get back in the garden again,
this is not really a likely
possibility, the
idea that we should
learn to move with the change
and not sit in this space
and hope that the climate
decides to come back and visit
us over here.
We must prepare for a
future that's different,
and therefore, sitting around
and waiting for change,
or thinking if, well, we just
stop burning some fossil fuel,
life will return--
it's like, no.
We start now to plan
how we will live
in an environment that
is complex and changing
all the time.
That means we now have
to really use our heads
to say, how can we
compensate for this?
And if we don't go
in that direction--
and we just sit here in the
chair and say, hey, Gregg,
look out the window and tell me,
has it returned back to normal
yet--
we're doomed in that
particular case.
>>BRADEN: That's the
thing with so many people.
This is such a different
way of thinking,
and I've emphasized that
throughout this series.
It's a very different
way of thinking,
and it can be frightening
for people who
don't know all the parameters.
Many people are waiting for the
world to get back to normal,
and we cannot go back to a
world that no longer exists.
So if we're clinging
to those old ideas,
it's difficult to embrace
the new discoveries that
are coming.
And I think the value of what
you're doing through your work,
hopefully what I'm
doing with mine,
and what we do as we
share this together,
is that we're sharing rock solid
science, new discoveries that
give us reasons to think
differently at a time
when the changing world requires
us to think differently.
So we have the
information we need,
and your studies of
the cells are showing
that when we can allow ourselves
to adapt to that environment
rather than
resisting the change,
we are the cells in this
new emerging humanity.
>>LIPTON: Right.
Well that, to me,
is really important,
because we have a
theory of evolution
from a Darwinian perspective,
which unfortunately is not
accurate enough.
And it has caused
a lot of problems
because the premise of it
is that life is a struggle
and that there's competition.
And there's going to be winners,
and there's going to be losers.
And I said, well,
what kind of result
comes from a theory like that?
I said, well first,
competition leads to violate,
and violence leads to war.
And all of this fighting
over this, in the process,
we destroy the environment
that's giving us life.
And the reality is this
theory is not correct,
that there is actually
two phases of evolution.
First, make the smarter
individual, the smartest one.
That's somewhat of
a Darwinian theory.
But once you get the
smartest individual,
you can't make an
individual any smarter,
there's physical parameters.
But it turns out nature
has repeated a cycle.
Once it always made the
smartest individual and species,
the next level of evolution is
to bring individuals together
to share their awareness
in a community.
So the phase of evolution that
we're experiencing right now
is, OK, we got all
the smart humans,
but now we have to bring the
humans together collectively
into a new organism, a super
organism called humanity.
Well, we have 50
trillion cells making up
a body we call a human.
Humanity, as an
organism, will have
approximately 8 billion
human cells as part
of this one living structure.
When our cells in our body
don't live in harmony,
that's called
autoimmune disease.
It's self-destruction
by definition.
If you look at the
world right now,
you start to realize
the human cells are not
living in harmony
with each other,
that the planet is experiencing
autoimmune disease,
self-destruction.
So the evolution is what?
Breaking down the
barriers that separate us,
because ultimately,
it's only when
we come together and recognize
the unity, that all humans are
cells in the same body, that
there will be a time where
we stop competing
with each other
and start cooperating
with each other.
And cooperation is
the new science.
>>BRADEN: That's the key.
This is why what we
shared at the UN,
I think of all the
things that we shared--
and just to bring
this to a close--
is the idea that nature is based
upon a model of cooperation,
not competition, of all
places, at the United Nations,
where they are helping people of
very different beliefs and very
different cultures work
together to solve problems.
To begin doing it from the
perspective of this model based
upon the harmony
in nature, I think,
is a powerful step forward.
And I want to thank
you for the work
that you're doing to
bring that forward.
>>LIPTON: Well, I
think collectively,
I enjoy what we do because we
offer the world an opportunity
to let go of the old beliefs
of limitation and separation
and allow them to
come together and be
more empowered to control
their own biology as well
as the nature of the
community of life
that we're in right now.
Just in closing, what
I have in my book
"Spontaneous Evolution" is
a humorous little thing.
It's that a garden is
not a battleground.
[LAUGHTER]
And the simple reality is,
what happened to our garden?
I say the battle is
destroying the garden,
and peace is what is required
to bring it back again.
>>BRADEN: Bruce Lipton,
I want to thank you
for the work you
do, and thank you
for taking a few minutes
to talk with us tonight,
share this wisdom.
We're going to have another
conversation on a little bit
different topic in this series,
and I look forward to that
as well.
>>LIPTON: I do too.
Thank you so very much for this
opportunity, brother Gregg.
Thank you.
>>BRADEN: I'm your
host, Gregg Braden,
and I'm inviting
you to stay tuned
for another episode of
"Missing Links," a very
special episode where
Bruce and I are going
to talk about the new
discoveries that are continuing
to support our work.
[MUSIC PLAYING]